README.md, before:

This is a [Next.js](https://nextjs.org) project bootstrapped with [`create-next-app`](https://github.com/vercel/next.js/tree/canary/packages/create-next-app).

## Getting Started

First, run the development server:

```bash
npm run dev
# or
yarn dev
# or
pnpm dev
# or
bun dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) with your browser to see the result.

You can start editing the page by modifying `app/page.js`. The page auto-updates as you edit the file.

This project uses [`next/font`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/optimizing/fonts) to automatically optimize and load [Geist](https://vercel.com/font), a new font family for Vercel.

## Learn More

To learn more about Next.js, take a look at the following resources:

- [Next.js Documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs) - learn about Next.js features and API.
- [Learn Next.js](https://nextjs.org/learn) - an interactive Next.js tutorial.

You can check out [the Next.js GitHub repository](https://github.com/vercel/next.js) - your feedback and contributions are welcome!

## Deploy on Vercel

The easiest way to deploy your Next.js app is to use the [Vercel Platform](https://vercel.com/new?utm_medium=default-template&filter=next.js&utm_source=create-next-app&utm_campaign=create-next-app-readme) from the creators of Next.js.

Check out our [Next.js deployment documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/deploying) for more details.

## Lessons utilities

- Rebalance multiple-choice correct answers across lesson JSONs to avoid bias towards a specific letter:

	PowerShell:

	```powershell
	npm run lessons:balance-mc
	```

	This will reorder choices and update the `expected` letter per question while preserving content.

## Ms. Sonoma LLM provider and prompt mode

You can switch providers and prompt verbosity without code changes using environment variables (see `.env.local`):

- SONOMA_PROVIDER=anthropic | openai (default auto-chooses `anthropic` if ANTHROPIC_API_KEY is set)
- SONOMA_MODEL=claude-4.1-opus (Preview) or any Anthropic model id
- ANTHROPIC_MODEL=claude-3.5-sonnet (fallback)
- SONOMA_OPENAI_MODEL=gpt-4o (for Ms. Sonoma tutoring; facilitator tools use gpt-4o-mini)
- SONOMA_PROMPT_MODE=compact | full (compact reduces tokens; full is more verbose)

**Model Strategy:**
- **Ms. Sonoma tutoring** (`/api/sonoma`): Uses `gpt-4o` (or Claude) for best child-facing experience
- **Lesson generation** (`/api/facilitator/lessons/generate`): Uses `gpt-4o-mini` for speed and cost efficiency
- **Lesson editing** (`/api/facilitator/lessons/request-changes`): Uses `gpt-4o-mini` for facilitator workflows

Revert strategy:
- Set SONOMA_PROVIDER=openai to force OpenAI
- Unset SONOMA_PROMPT_MODE or set to `full` to restore the original, longer prompt
- Remove ANTHROPIC_API_KEY to disable Anthropic entirely

## Transcript archiving (Supabase)

Learner transcripts are archived to Supabase Storage (append-only ledger + consolidated PDF) when Supabase is configured. To enable:

1) Add env vars in `.env.local` (and in Vercel envs):
	- NEXT_PUBLIC_SUPABASE_URL
	- NEXT_PUBLIC_SUPABASE_ANON_KEY

2) Provision Storage and policies by following `docs/transcripts-storage.md`.

When env vars are missing or the user is not logged in, the feature no-ops safely and the rest of the app continues to work.

Commit message:

Fix: Ensure user emails are saved to profiles table
- Add comprehensive Supabase setup script with email sync triggers
- Add verification queries to diagnose profile/email sync issues
- Create detailed setup documentation with troubleshooting guide
- Update README with required Supabase setup instructions
- Fix ESLint error: escape apostrophe in generated lessons page

This fixes the issue where user emails weren't being saved to the
profiles table during signup. The database triggers now automatically
sync emails from auth.users to public.profiles on user creation and
updates.

README.md, after:

This is a [Next.js](https://nextjs.org) project bootstrapped with [`create-next-app`](https://github.com/vercel/next.js/tree/canary/packages/create-next-app).

## Getting Started

First, run the development server:

```bash
npm run dev
# or
yarn dev
# or
pnpm dev
# or
bun dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) with your browser to see the result.

You can start editing the page by modifying `app/page.js`. The page auto-updates as you edit the file.

This project uses [`next/font`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/optimizing/fonts) to automatically optimize and load [Geist](https://vercel.com/font), a new font family for Vercel.

## Learn More

To learn more about Next.js, take a look at the following resources:

- [Next.js Documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs) - learn about Next.js features and API.
- [Learn Next.js](https://nextjs.org/learn) - an interactive Next.js tutorial.

You can check out [the Next.js GitHub repository](https://github.com/vercel/next.js) - your feedback and contributions are welcome!

## Deploy on Vercel

The easiest way to deploy your Next.js app is to use the [Vercel Platform](https://vercel.com/new?utm_medium=default-template&filter=next.js&utm_source=create-next-app&utm_campaign=create-next-app-readme) from the creators of Next.js.

Check out our [Next.js deployment documentation](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/deploying) for more details.

## Lessons utilities

- Rebalance multiple-choice correct answers across lesson JSONs to avoid bias towards a specific letter:

	PowerShell:

	```powershell
	npm run lessons:balance-mc
	```

	This will reorder choices and update the `expected` letter per question while preserving content.

## Ms. Sonoma LLM provider and prompt mode

You can switch providers and prompt verbosity without code changes using environment variables (see `.env.local`):

- SONOMA_PROVIDER=anthropic | openai (default auto-chooses `anthropic` if ANTHROPIC_API_KEY is set)
- SONOMA_MODEL=claude-4.1-opus (Preview) or any Anthropic model id
- ANTHROPIC_MODEL=claude-3.5-sonnet (fallback)
- SONOMA_OPENAI_MODEL=gpt-4o (for Ms. Sonoma tutoring; facilitator tools use gpt-4o-mini)
- SONOMA_PROMPT_MODE=compact | full (compact reduces tokens; full is more verbose)

**Model Strategy:**
- **Ms. Sonoma tutoring** (`/api/sonoma`): Uses `gpt-4o` (or Claude) for best child-facing experience
- **Lesson generation** (`/api/facilitator/lessons/generate`): Uses `gpt-4o-mini` for speed and cost efficiency
- **Lesson editing** (`/api/facilitator/lessons/request-changes`): Uses `gpt-4o-mini` for facilitator workflows

Revert strategy:
- Set SONOMA_PROVIDER=openai to force OpenAI
- Unset SONOMA_PROMPT_MODE or set to `full` to restore the original, longer prompt
- Remove ANTHROPIC_API_KEY to disable Anthropic entirely

## Supabase Setup

### Required: Profiles Email Sync

**IMPORTANT:** User emails won't be saved to the database without this setup.

Run the setup script in your Supabase SQL Editor:
- Script: `scripts/setup-profiles-with-triggers.sql`
- Guide: `docs/SETUP_PROFILES_EMAIL_SYNC.md`

This creates database triggers that automatically sync user emails from `auth.users` to the `profiles` table when users sign up or update their accounts.

To verify it's working, run: `scripts/verify-profiles-setup.sql`

### Optional: Transcript Archiving

Learner transcripts are archived to Supabase Storage (append-only ledger + consolidated PDF) when Supabase is configured. To enable:

1) Add env vars in `.env.local` (and in Vercel envs):
	- NEXT_PUBLIC_SUPABASE_URL
	- NEXT_PUBLIC_SUPABASE_ANON_KEY

2) Provision Storage and policies by following `docs/transcripts-storage.md`.

When env vars are missing or the user is not logged in, the feature no-ops safely and the rest of the app continues to work.
