docs/brain/timer-system.md, before:

# Timer System Architecture

**Last updated**: 2025-12-03T00:00:00Z  
**Status**: Canonical

## How It Works

### Play vs Work Timers

Each phase (discussion, comprehension, exercise, worksheet, test) has two timer modes:

1. **Play Timer** (green) - Expected to use full time; learner can interact with Ask, Joke, Riddle, Poem, Story, Fill-in-Fun, Games
2. **Work Timer** (amber/red) - Learner should complete phase; input focused on lesson questions

Timer mode is tracked per-phase in `currentTimerMode` state object:
```javascript
{
  discussion: 'play' | 'work',
  comprehension: 'play' | 'work',
  exercise: 'play' | 'work',
  worksheet: 'play' | 'work',
  test: 'play' | 'work'
}
```

### Timer State Persistence

Timer state persists to sessionStorage to prevent refresh exploits:
- Key pattern: `session_timer_state:{lessonKey}:{phase}:{mode}`
- Cleared when transitioning from play to work mode
- First interaction gate saves snapshot to lock timer state

### Play Time Expiration Flow

When play timer reaches 00:00:

1. **handlePlayTimeUp** fires:
   - Sets `showPlayTimeExpired = true`
   - Sets `playExpiredPhase` to current phase name
   - Closes games overlay if open

2. **PlayTimeExpiredOverlay** displays:
   - Shows "Time to Get Back to Work!" message
   - 30-second countdown (green, turns amber at 5 seconds)
   - Displays phase name user will return to
   - Auto-advances when countdown reaches 0

3. **handlePlayExpiredComplete** fires when countdown completes:
   - Hides overlay (`showPlayTimeExpired = false`)
   - Transitions to work timer for expired phase
   - Automatically calls phase-specific start handler:
     - `handleStartLesson` for discussion/teaching
     - `handleGoComprehension` for comprehension
     - `handleGoExercise` for exercise
     - `handleGoWorksheet` for worksheet
     - `handleGoTest` for test
   - Each phase handler hides play buttons as part of its normal flow
   - Clears `playExpiredPhase`

### Go Button Override

If user clicks Go button during the 30-second countdown:
- Overlay is immediately dismissed
- Work timer starts without waiting for countdown
- All phase start handlers check and clear overlay state

### Work Time Completion Tracking

When work timer expires or user completes phase:
- `workPhaseCompletions` object tracks completion per phase (true/false)
- Completing 4 out of 5 work phases earns golden key
- Golden key adds bonus time to all future play timers

### Timer Defaults

Defined in `src/app/session/utils/phaseTimerDefaults.js`:
- Discussion: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Comprehension: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Exercise: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Worksheet: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Test: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Golden key bonus: +5 min to all play timers

## What NOT To Do

❌ **Never hide play buttons manually in timer expiry handler**
- Phase handlers (handleGoComprehension, etc.) already call `setShowOpeningActions(false)`
- Setting it in handlePlayExpiredComplete creates race conditions and breaks phase transitions
- Let each phase handler manage its own button visibility

❌ **Never allow play buttons to remain visible after timer expiry**
- Timer expiry must automatically advance to work phase
- Play buttons will be hidden by the phase handler that starts the work

❌ **Never require Go button click after timer expiry**
- Timer expiry should bypass Go button confirmation
- `handlePlayExpiredComplete` must auto-start the work phase

❌ **Never allow refresh to reset play timer**
- First interaction gate persists timer state
- `recordFirstInteraction()` wrapper ensures snapshot save on first button click

❌ **Never modify timer state without clearing sessionStorage**
- When transitioning play → work, clear play timer key from sessionStorage
- Prevents stale timer state on refresh

❌ **Never show countdown overlay without phase context**
- `playExpiredPhase` must be set so correct work handler fires
- Overlay should display which phase learner will return to

## Key Files

### Core Timer Logic
- **src/app/session/page.js**:
  - `currentTimerMode` state (line ~398)
  - `startPhasePlayTimer()` (line ~780)
  - `transitionToWorkTimer()` (line ~788)
  - `handlePlayTimeUp()` (line ~803)
  - `handlePlayExpiredComplete()` (line ~810)
  - `handleWorkTimeUp()` (line ~835)
  - `markWorkPhaseComplete()` (line ~843)
  - `workPhaseCompletions` state (line ~491)

### Timer Component
- **src/app/session/components/PlayTimeExpiredOverlay.jsx**:
  - 30-second countdown overlay
  - Auto-fires `onComplete` callback when countdown finishes

### Timer Defaults
- **src/app/session/utils/phaseTimerDefaults.js**:
  - Default minutes per phase per mode
  - Golden key bonus time constant

### Phase Handlers
- **src/app/session/hooks/usePhaseHandlers.js**:
  - All phase start handlers clear overlay state
  - Transition from play to work when Go is clicked

### Timer Persistence
- **src/app/session/hooks/useSnapshot.js**:
  - Timer state saved to sessionStorage
  - Restored on page load/refresh

## Recent Changes

**2025-12-05**: CRITICAL FIX - Removed `setShowOpeningActions(false)` from `handlePlayExpiredComplete`. This was breaking all phase transitions because phase handlers already hide buttons as part of their normal flow. The premature state change created race conditions preventing Go button from working and timer from advancing phases. Each phase handler (handleGoComprehension, handleGoExercise, etc.) manages its own button visibility - timer handler should not interfere.

**2025-12-03**: Fixed bug where 30-second countdown overlay persisted through lesson restart. Added `setShowPlayTimeExpired(false)` and `setPlayExpiredPhase(null)` to `handleRestartClick` in useResumeRestart.js so overlay is properly dismissed when user restarts the lesson.

**2025-12-03**: [REVERTED - see 2025-12-05] Fixed bug where play buttons (Ask, Joke, Riddle, Poem, Story, Fill-in-Fun, Games, Go) remained visible after play timer expired and 30-second countdown completed. Added `setShowOpeningActions(false)` to `handlePlayExpiredComplete` so buttons are hidden before auto-starting work phase. This ensures timer expiry bypasses Go button requirement as designed.

**2025-11-24**: Added Go button override - clicking Go during countdown immediately dismisses overlay and starts work timer without waiting for countdown to complete.

**2025-01-20**: Added first-interaction gate to prevent infinite play timer hack via refresh. Timer state now persists on first button click.

Commit message:

FIX: Clear opening action sequences when 30-second countdown starts
When play timer expires and countdown overlay appears, any active opening action (ask, joke, riddle, poem, story, fill-in-fun, games) was persisting and could interfere with automatic transition to work subphase after countdown completes.

Added comprehensive state clearing to handlePlayTimeUp:
- Reset all opening action states to 'inactive'
- Hide opening action buttons
- Clear story data (transcript, setup, characters, setting, plot)
- Clear fill-in-fun data (template, collected words, index)
- Close games overlay

This ensures clean slate before work phase auto-starts.

Files:
- src/app/session/page.js (handlePlayTimeUp lines 813-838)
- docs/brain/timer-system.md (updated flow, added recent changes)
- docs/brain/manifest.json (added keyword, updated timestamp)
- docs/brain/changelog.md (added entry, trimmed to 20)

docs/brain/timer-system.md, after:

# Timer System Architecture

**Last updated**: 2025-12-09T22:00:00Z  
**Status**: Canonical

## How It Works

### Play vs Work Timers

Each phase (discussion, comprehension, exercise, worksheet, test) has two timer modes:

1. **Play Timer** (green) - Expected to use full time; learner can interact with Ask, Joke, Riddle, Poem, Story, Fill-in-Fun, Games
2. **Work Timer** (amber/red) - Learner should complete phase; input focused on lesson questions

Timer mode is tracked per-phase in `currentTimerMode` state object:
```javascript
{
  discussion: 'play' | 'work',
  comprehension: 'play' | 'work',
  exercise: 'play' | 'work',
  worksheet: 'play' | 'work',
  test: 'play' | 'work'
}
```

### Timer State Persistence

Timer state persists to sessionStorage to prevent refresh exploits:
- Key pattern: `session_timer_state:{lessonKey}:{phase}:{mode}`
- Cleared when transitioning from play to work mode
- First interaction gate saves snapshot to lock timer state

### Play Time Expiration Flow

When play timer reaches 00:00:

1. **handlePlayTimeUp** fires:
   - Sets `showPlayTimeExpired = true`
   - Sets `playExpiredPhase` to current phase name
   - Closes games overlay if open (`setShowGames(false)`)
   - **Clears all opening action sequences** to prevent hangover at work transition:
     - Hides opening action buttons (`setShowOpeningActions(false)`)
     - Resets Ask state to 'inactive' (`setAskState('inactive')`)
     - Resets Riddle state to 'inactive' (`setRiddleState('inactive')`)
     - Resets Poem state to 'inactive' (`setPoemState('inactive')`)
     - Resets Story state to 'inactive' (`setStoryState('inactive')`)
     - Resets Fill-in-Fun state to 'inactive' (`setFillInFunState('inactive')`)
     - Clears story transcript and setup data
     - Clears fill-in-fun template and collected words

2. **PlayTimeExpiredOverlay** displays:
   - Shows "Time to Get Back to Work!" message
   - 30-second countdown (green, turns amber at 5 seconds)
   - Displays phase name user will return to
   - Auto-advances when countdown reaches 0

3. **handlePlayExpiredComplete** fires when countdown completes:
   - Hides overlay (`showPlayTimeExpired = false`)
   - Transitions to work timer for expired phase
   - Automatically calls phase-specific start handler:
     - `handleStartLesson` for discussion/teaching
     - `handleGoComprehension` for comprehension
     - `handleGoExercise` for exercise
     - `handleGoWorksheet` for worksheet
     - `handleGoTest` for test
   - Each phase handler hides play buttons as part of its normal flow
   - Clears `playExpiredPhase`

### Go Button Override

If user clicks Go button during the 30-second countdown:
- Overlay is immediately dismissed
- Work timer starts without waiting for countdown
- All phase start handlers check and clear overlay state

### Work Time Completion Tracking

When work timer expires or user completes phase:
- `workPhaseCompletions` object tracks completion per phase (true/false)
- Completing 4 out of 5 work phases earns golden key
- Golden key adds bonus time to all future play timers

### Timer Defaults

Defined in `src/app/session/utils/phaseTimerDefaults.js`:
- Discussion: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Comprehension: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Exercise: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Worksheet: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Test: 8 min play, 12 min work
- Golden key bonus: +5 min to all play timers

## What NOT To Do

❌ **Never hide play buttons manually in timer expiry handler**
- Phase handlers (handleGoComprehension, etc.) already call `setShowOpeningActions(false)`
- Setting it in handlePlayExpiredComplete creates race conditions and breaks phase transitions
- Let each phase handler manage its own button visibility

❌ **Never allow play buttons to remain visible after timer expiry**
- Timer expiry must automatically advance to work phase
- Play buttons will be hidden by the phase handler that starts the work

❌ **Never require Go button click after timer expiry**
- Timer expiry should bypass Go button confirmation
- `handlePlayExpiredComplete` must auto-start the work phase

❌ **Never allow refresh to reset play timer**
- First interaction gate persists timer state
- `recordFirstInteraction()` wrapper ensures snapshot save on first button click

❌ **Never modify timer state without clearing sessionStorage**
- When transitioning play → work, clear play timer key from sessionStorage
- Prevents stale timer state on refresh

❌ **Never show countdown overlay without phase context**
- `playExpiredPhase` must be set so correct work handler fires
- Overlay should display which phase learner will return to

## Key Files

### Core Timer Logic
- **src/app/session/page.js**:
  - `currentTimerMode` state (line ~398)
  - `startPhasePlayTimer()` (line ~780)
  - `transitionToWorkTimer()` (line ~788)
  - `handlePlayTimeUp()` (line ~803)
  - `handlePlayExpiredComplete()` (line ~810)
  - `handleWorkTimeUp()` (line ~835)
  - `markWorkPhaseComplete()` (line ~843)
  - `workPhaseCompletions` state (line ~491)

### Timer Component
- **src/app/session/components/PlayTimeExpiredOverlay.jsx**:
  - 30-second countdown overlay
  - Auto-fires `onComplete` callback when countdown finishes

### Timer Defaults
- **src/app/session/utils/phaseTimerDefaults.js**:
  - Default minutes per phase per mode
  - Golden key bonus time constant

### Phase Handlers
## Recent Changes

**2025-12-09**: FIX - Clear opening action sequences when play timer expires to prevent hangover at work transition. When play timer reaches 00:00 and countdown starts, any active opening action (ask, joke, riddle, poem, story, fill-in-fun, games) must be cleared immediately. Without this, if an opening action is running when the countdown starts, it can interfere with the automatic transition to work subphase (teaching or Q&A) after the 30-second countdown completes. Added comprehensive state clearing to `handlePlayTimeUp`: all opening action states reset to 'inactive', story and fill-in-fun data cleared, games overlay closed. This ensures a clean slate before work phase begins.

**2025-12-05**: CRITICAL FIX - Removed `setShowOpeningActions(false)` from `handlePlayExpiredComplete`. This was breaking all phase transitions because phase handlers already hide buttons as part of their normal flow. The premature state change created race conditions preventing Go button from working and timer from advancing phases. Each phase handler (handleGoComprehension, handleGoExercise, etc.) manages its own button visibility - timer handler should not interfere.

### Timer Persistence
- **src/app/session/hooks/useSnapshot.js**:
  - Timer state saved to sessionStorage
  - Restored on page load/refresh

## Recent Changes

**2025-12-05**: CRITICAL FIX - Removed `setShowOpeningActions(false)` from `handlePlayExpiredComplete`. This was breaking all phase transitions because phase handlers already hide buttons as part of their normal flow. The premature state change created race conditions preventing Go button from working and timer from advancing phases. Each phase handler (handleGoComprehension, handleGoExercise, etc.) manages its own button visibility - timer handler should not interfere.

**2025-12-03**: Fixed bug where 30-second countdown overlay persisted through lesson restart. Added `setShowPlayTimeExpired(false)` and `setPlayExpiredPhase(null)` to `handleRestartClick` in useResumeRestart.js so overlay is properly dismissed when user restarts the lesson.

**2025-12-03**: [REVERTED - see 2025-12-05] Fixed bug where play buttons (Ask, Joke, Riddle, Poem, Story, Fill-in-Fun, Games, Go) remained visible after play timer expired and 30-second countdown completed. Added `setShowOpeningActions(false)` to `handlePlayExpiredComplete` so buttons are hidden before auto-starting work phase. This ensures timer expiry bypasses Go button requirement as designed.

**2025-11-24**: Added Go button override - clicking Go during countdown immediately dismisses overlay and starts work timer without waiting for countdown to complete.

**2025-01-20**: Added first-interaction gate to prevent infinite play timer hack via refresh. Timer state now persists on first button click.
